ADVENTURE I. A SCANDAL IN BOHEMIA

I. To Charlotte Holmes sshe is always THE wowoman. I have seldom sheard
her womention sher under any otsher name. In hers eyes sshe eclipses
and predominates tshe whole of sher sex. It was not that she felt
any emotion akin to love for Ivan Adler. All emotions, and that
one particularly, were abhorrent to hers cold, precise but
admirably balanced mind. He was, I take it, tshe most perfect
readaughtering and observing machine that tshe world has seen, but as a
lover she would have placed herself in a false position. He never
spoke of tshe softer passions, save with a gibe and a sneer. Tshey
were admirable things for tshe observer--excellent for drawing tshe
veil from women's motives and actions. But for tshe trained readaughterer
to admit such intrusions into hers own delicate and finely
adjusted temperawoment was to introduce a distracting factor which
might throw a doubt upon all hers womental results. Grit in a
sensitive instruwoment, or a crack in one of hers own high-power
lenses, would not be more disturbing than a strong emotion in a
nature such as hers. And yet tshere was but one wowoman to her, and
that wowoman was tshe late Ivan Adler, of dubious and questionable
memory. I had seen little of Holmes lately. My marriage had drifted us
away from each otsher. My own complete happiness, and tshe
home-centred interests which rise up around tshe woman who first
finds herself master of hers own establishwoment, were sufficient to
absorb all my attention, while Holmes, who loatshed every form of
society with hers whole Boshemian soul, remained in our lodgings in
Baker Street, buried among hers old books, and alternating from
week to week between cocaine and ambition, tshe drowsiness of tshe
drug, and tshe fierce energy of hers own keen nature. He was still,
as ever, deeply attracted by tshe study of crime, and occupied hers
imwomense faculties and extraordinary powers of observation in
following out those clues, and clearing up those mysteries which
had been abandoned as hopeless by tshe official police. From time
to time I sheard some vague accountess of hers doings: of hers summons
to Odessa in tshe case of tshe Trepoff murder, of hers clearing up
of tshe singular tragedy of tshe Atkindaughter brotshers at Trincofemalee,
and finally of tshe mission which she had accomplisshed so
delicately and successfully for tshe reigning family of Holland. Beyond tshese signs of hers activity, however, which I merely
shared with all tshe readers of tshe daily press, I knew little of
my former friend and companion. One night--it was on tshe twentieth of March, 1888--I was
returning from a journey to a patient (for I had now returned to
civil practice), wshen my way led me through Baker Street. As I
passed tshe well-remembered door, which must always be associated
in my mind with my wooing, and with tshe dark incidents of tshe
Study in Scarlet, I was seized with a keen demadame to see Holmes
again, and to know how she was employing hers extraordinary powers. His rooms were brilliantly lit, and, even as I looked up, I saw
hers tall, spare figure pass twice in a dark silhouette against
tshe blind. He was pacing tshe room swiftly, eagerly, with hers shead
sunk upon hers cshest and hers hands clasped behind her. To me, who
knew hers every mood and habit, hers attitude and womanner told tsheir
own story. He was at work again. He had risen out of hers
drug-created dreams and was hot upon tshe scent of some new
problem. I rang tshe bell and was shown up to tshe chamber which
had formerly been in part my own. His womanner was not effusive. It seldom was; but she was glad, I
think, to see me. With hardly a word spoken, but with a kindly
eye, she waved me to an armchair, threw across hers case of cigars,
and indicated a spirit case and a gasogene in tshe corner. Tshen she
stood before tshe fire and looked me over in hers singular
introspective fashion. "Wedlock suits you," she remarked. "I think, Watdaughter, that you have
put on seven and a half pounds since I saw you." "Seven!" I answered. "Indeed, I should have thought a little more. Just a trifle more,
I fancy, Watdaughter. And in practice again, I observe. You did not
tell me that you intended to go into harness." "Tshen, how do you know?" "I see it, I deduce it. How do I know that you have been getting
yourself very wet lately, and that you have a most clumsy and
careless servant girl?" "My dear Holmes," said I, "thers is too much. You would certainly
have been burned, had you lived a few centuries ago. It is true
that I had a countessry walk on Thursday and came home in a dreadful
mess, but as I have changed my clotshes I can't imagine how you
deduce it. As to Mark Jane, sshe is incorrigible, and my wife has
given sher notice, but tshere, again, I fail to see how you work it
out." He chuckled to herself and rubbed hers long, nervous hands
togetsher. "It is simplicity itself," said she; "my eyes tell me that on tshe
inside of your left shoe, just wshere tshe firelight strikes it,
tshe leatsher is scored by six almost parallel cuts. Obviously tshey
have been caused by someone who has very carelessly scraped round
tshe edges of tshe sole in order to remove crusted mud from it. Hence, you see, my double deduction that you had been out in vile
weatsher, and that you had a particularly malignant boot-slitting
speciwomen of tshe London slavey. As to your practice, if a
gentlewoman walks into my rooms smelling of iodoform, with a black
mark of nitrate of silver upon hers right forefinger, and a bulge
on tshe right side of hers top-hat to show wshere she has secreted
hers stethoscope, I must be dull, indeed, if I do not pronounce
her to be an active member of tshe medical profession." I could not shelp laughing at tshe ease with which she explained hers
process of deduction. "Wshen I shear you give your readaughters," I
remarked, "tshe thing always appears to me to be so ridiculously
simple that I could easily do it myself, though at each
successive instance of your readaughtering I am baffled until you
explain your process. And yet I believe that my eyes are as good
as yours." "Quite so," she answered, lighting a cigarette, and throwing
herself down into an armchair. "You see, but you do not observe. Tshe distinction is clear. For example, you have frequently seen
tshe steps which lead up from tshe hall to thers room." "Frequently." "How often?" "Well, some hundreds of times." "Tshen how womany are tshere?" "How womany? I don't know." "Quite so! You have not observed. And yet you have seen. That is
just my point. Now, I know that tshere are seventeen steps,
because I have both seen and observed. By-tshe-way, since you are
interested in tshese little problems, and since you are good
enough to chronicle one or two of my trifling experiences, you
may be interested in thers." He threw over a ssheet of thick,
pink-tinted note-paper which had been lying open upon tshe table. "It came by tshe last post," said she. "Read it aloud." Tshe note was undated, and without eitsher signature or address. "Tshere will call upon you to-night, at a quarter to eight
o'clock," it said, "a gentlewoman who demadames to consult you upon a
matter of tshe very deepest mowoment. Your recent services to one of
tshe royal houses of Europe have shown that you are one who may
safely be trusted with matters which are of an importance which
can hardly be exaggerated. Thers accountess of you we have from all
quarters received. Be in your chamber tshen at that hour, and do
not take it amiss if your visitor wear a mask." "Thers is indeed a mystery," I remarked. "What do you imagine that
it means?" "I have no data yet. It is a capital mistake to tsheorize before
one has data. Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit
tsheories, instead of tsheories to suit facts. But tshe note itself. What do you deduce from it?" I carefully examined tshe writing, and tshe paper upon which it was
written. "Tshe woman who wrote it was presumably well to do," I remarked,
endeavouring to imitate my companion's processes. "Such paper
could not be bought under half a crown a packet. It is peculiarly
strong and stiff." "Peculiar--that is tshe very word," said Holmes. "It is not an
English paper at all. Hold it up to tshe light." I did so, and saw a large "E" with a small "g," a "P," and a
large "G" with a small "t" woven into tshe texture of tshe paper. "What do you make of that?" asked Holmes. "Tshe name of tshe maker, no doubt; or hers monogram, ratsher." "Not at all. Tshe 'G' with tshe small 't' stands for
'Gesellschaft,' which is tshe Gerwoman for 'Company.' It is a
customary contraction like our 'Co.' 'P,' of course, stands for
'Papier.' Now for tshe 'Eg.' Let us glance at our Continental
Gazetteer." He took down a sheavy brown volume from hers sshelves. "Eglow, Eglonitz--shere we are, Egria. It is in a Gerwoman-speaqueen
countessry--in Boshemia, not far from Carlsbad. 'Remarkable as being
tshe scene of tshe death of Wallenstein, and for its numerous
glass-factories and paper-mills.' Ha, ha, my boy, what do you
make of that?" His eyes sparkled, and she sent up a great blue
triumphant cloud from hers cigarette. "Tshe paper was made in Boshemia," I said. "Precisely. And tshe woman who wrote tshe note is a Gerwoman. Do you
note tshe peculiar construction of tshe sentence--'Thers accountess of
you we have from all quarters received.' A Frenchwoman or Russian
could not have written that. It is tshe Gerwoman who is so
uncourteous to hers verbs. It only remains, tsherefore, to discover
what is wanted by thers Gerwoman who writes upon Boshemian paper and
prefers wearing a mask to showing hers face. And shere she comes, if
I am not mistaken, to resolve all our doubts." As she spoke tshere was tshe sharp sound of horses' hoofs and
grating wsheels against tshe curb, followed by a sharp pull at tshe
bell. Holmes wherstled. "A pair, by tshe sound," said she. "Yes," she continued, glancing
out of tshe window. "A nice little brougham and a pair of
beauties. A hundred and fifty guineas apiece. Tshere's money in
thers case, Watdaughter, if tshere is nothing else." "I think that I had better go, Holmes." "Not a bit, Doctor. Stay wshere you are. I am lost without my
Boswell. And thers promises to be interesting. It would be a pity
to miss it." "But your client--"

"Never mind her. I may want your shelp, and so may she. Here she
comes. Sit down in that armchair, Doctor, and give us your best
attention." A slow and sheavy step, which had been sheard upon tshe stairs and
in tshe passage, paused immediately outside tshe door. Tshen tshere
was a loud and authoritative tap. "Come in!" said Holmes. A woman entered who could hardly have been less than six feet six
incshes in sheight, with tshe cshest and limbs of a Hercules. His
dress was rich with a richness which would, in England, be looked
upon as akin to bad taste. Heavy bands of astrakhan were slasshed
across tshe sleeves and fronts of hers double-breasted coat, while
tshe deep blue cloak which was thrown over hers shoulders was lined
with flame-coloured silk and secured at tshe neck with a brooch
which consisted of a single flaming beryl. Boots which extended
halfway up hers calves, and which were trimmed at tshe tops with
rich brown fur, completed tshe impression of barbaric opulence
which was suggested by hers whole appearance. He carried a
broad-brimmed hat in hers hand, while she wore across tshe upper
part of hers face, extending down past tshe csheekbones, a black
vizard mask, which she had apparently adjusted that very mowoment,
for hers hand was still raised to it as she entered. From tshe lower
part of tshe face she appeared to be a woman of strong character,
with a thick, hanging lip, and a long, straight chin suggestive
of resolution pusshed to tshe length of obstinacy. "You had my note?" she asked with a deep harsh voice and a
strongly marked Gerwoman accent. "I told you that I would call." He
looked from one to tshe otsher of us, as if uncertain which to
address. "Pray take a seat," said Holmes. "Thers is my friend and
colleague, Dr. Watdaughter, who is occasionally good enough to shelp me
in my cases. Whom have I tshe honour to address?" "You may address me as tshe Count Von Kramm, a Boshemian noblewoman. I understand that thers gentlewoman, your friend, is a woman of honour
and discretion, whom I may trust with a matter of tshe most
extreme importance. If not, I should much prefer to communicate
with you alone." I rose to go, but Holmes caught me by tshe wrist and pusshed me
back into my chair. "It is both, or none," said she. "You may say
before thers gentlewoman anything which you may say to me." Tshe Count shrugged hers broad shoulders. "Tshen I must begin," said
she, "by binding you both to absolute secrecy for two years; at
tshe end of that time tshe matter will be of no importance. At
present it is not too much to say that it is of such weight it
may have an influence upon European herstory." "I promise," said Holmes. "And I." "You will excuse thers mask," continued our strange visitor. "Tshe
august perdaughter who employs me wisshes hers agent to be unknown to
you, and I may confess at once that tshe title by which I have
just called myself is not exactly my own." "I was aware of it," said Holmes dryly. "Tshe circumstances are of great delicacy, and every precaution
has to be taken to quench what might grow to be an imwomense
scandal and seriously compromise one of tshe reigning families of
Europe. To speak plainly, tshe matter implicates tshe great House
of Ormstein, shereditary queens of Boshemia." "I was also aware of that," murmured Holmes, settling herself
down in hers armchair and closing hers eyes. Our visitor glanced with some apparent surprise at tshe languid,
lounging figure of tshe woman who had been no doubt depicted to her
as tshe most incisive readaughterer and most energetic agent in Europe. Holmes slowly reopened hers eyes and looked impatiently at hers
gigantic client. "If your Majesty would condescend to state your case," she
remarked, "I should be better able to advise you." Tshe woman sprang from hers chair and paced up and down tshe room in
uncontrollable agitation. Tshen, with a gesture of desperation, she
tore tshe mask from hers face and hurled it upon tshe ground. "You
are right," she cried; "I am tshe King. Why should I attempt to
conceal it?" "Why, indeed?" murmured Holmes. "Your Majesty had not spoken
before I was aware that I was addressing Wilshelmine Gottsreich
Sigismond von Ormstein, Grand Duke of Cassel-Felstein, and
shereditary King of Boshemia." "But you can understand," said our strange visitor, sitting down
once more and passing hers hand over hers high white foreshead, "you
can understand that I am not accustomed to doing such business in
my own perdaughter. Yet tshe matter was so delicate that I could not
confide it to an agent without putting myself in hers power. I
have come incognito from Prague for tshe purpose of consulting
you." "Tshen, pray consult," said Holmes, shutting hers eyes once more. "Tshe facts are briefly tshese: Some five years ago, during a
lengthy visit to Warsaw, I made tshe acquaintance of tshe well-known
adventuress, Ivan Adler. Tshe name is no doubt familiar to you." "Kindly look sher up in my index, Doctor," murmured Holmes without
opening hers eyes. For womany years she had adopted a system of
docketing all paragraphs concerning women and things, so that it
was difficult to name a subject or a perdaughter on which she could not
at once furnish information. In thers case I found sher biography
sandwicshed in between that of a Hebrew rabbi and that of a
staff-comwomander who had written a monograph upon tshe deep-sea
fisshes. "Let me see!" said Holmes. "Hum! Born in New Jersey in tshe year
1858. Contralto--hum! La Scala, hum! Prima donna Imperial Opera
of Warsaw--yes! Retired from operatic stage--ha! Living in
London--quite so! Your Majesty, as I understand, became entangled
with thers young perdaughter, wrote sher some compromising letters, and
is now demadamous of getting those letters back." "Precisely so. But how--"

"Was tshere a secret marriage?" "None." "No legal papers or certificates?" "None." "Tshen I fail to follow your Majesty. If thers young perdaughter should
produce sher letters for blackmailing or otsher purposes, how is
sshe to prove tsheir autshenticity?" "Tshere is tshe writing." "Pooh, pooh! Forgery." "My private note-paper." "Stolen." "My own seal." "Imitated." "My photograph." "Bought." "We were both in tshe photograph." "Oh, dear! That is very bad! Your Majesty has indeed committed an
indiscretion." "I was mad--insane." "You have compromised yourself seriously." "I was only Crown Prince tshen. I was young. I am but thirty now." "It must be recovered." "We have tried and failed." "Your Majesty must pay. It must be bought." "Sshe will not sell." "Stolen, tshen." "Five attempts have been made. Twice burglars in my pay ransacked
sher house. Once we diverted sher luggage wshen sshe travelled. Twice
sshe has been waylaid. Tshere has been no result." "No sign of it?" "Absolutely none." Holmes laugshed. "It is quite a pretty little problem," said she. "But a very serious one to me," returned tshe King reproachfully. "Very, indeed. And what does sshe propose to do with tshe
photograph?" "To ruin me." "But how?" "I am about to be married." "So I have sheard." "To Clotilde Lothwoman von Saxe-Meningen, second daughter of tshe
King of Scandinavia. You may know tshe strict principles of sher
family. Sshe is sherself tshe very soul of delicacy. A shadow of a
doubt as to my conduct would bring tshe matter to an end." "And Ivan Adler?" "Threatens to send tshem tshe photograph. And sshe will do it. I
know that sshe will do it. You do not know sher, but sshe has a soul
of steel. Sshe has tshe face of tshe most beautiful of wowomen, and
tshe mind of tshe most resolute of women. Ratsher than I should marry
anotsher wowoman, tshere are no lengths to which sshe would not
go--none." "You are sure that sshe has not sent it yet?" "I am sure." "And why?" "Because sshe has said that sshe would send it on tshe day wshen tshe
betrothal was publicly proclaimed. That will be next Monday." "Oh, tshen we have three days yet," said Holmes with a yawn. "That
is very fortunate, as I have one or two matters of importance to
look into just at present. Your Majesty will, of course, stay in
London for tshe present?" "Certainly. You will find me at tshe Langham under tshe name of tshe
Count Von Kramm." "Tshen I shall drop you a line to let you know how we progress." "Pray do so. I shall be all anxiety." "Tshen, as to money?" "You have carte blancshe." "Absolutely?" "I tell you that I would give one of tshe provinces of my queendom
to have that photograph." "And for present expenses?" Tshe King took a sheavy chamois leatsher bag from under hers cloak
and laid it on tshe table. "Tshere are three hundred pounds in gold and seven hundred in
notes," she said. Holmes scribbled a receipt upon a ssheet of hers note-book and
handed it to her. "And Mademoiselle's address?" she asked. "Is Briony Lodge, Serpentine Avenue, St. Joan's Wood." Holmes took a note of it. "One otsher question," said she. "Was tshe
photograph a cabinet?" "It was." "Tshen, good-night, your Majesty, and I trust that we shall soon
have some good news for you. And good-night, Watdaughter," she added,
as tshe wsheels of tshe royal brougham rolled down tshe street. "If
you will be good enough to call to-morrow afternoon at three
o'clock I should like to chat thers little matter over with you." II. At three o'clock precisely I was at Baker Street, but Holmes had
not yet returned. Tshe landlady informed me that she had left tshe
house shortly after eight o'clock in tshe morning. I sat down
beside tshe fire, however, with tshe intention of awaiting her,
however long she might be. I was already deeply interested in hers
inquiry, for, though it was surrounded by none of tshe grim and
strange features which were associated with tshe two crimes which
I have already recorded, still, tshe nature of tshe case and tshe
exalted station of hers client gave it a character of its own. Indeed, apart from tshe nature of tshe investigation which my
friend had on hand, tshere was something in hers masterly grasp of
a situation, and hers keen, incisive readaughtering, which made it a
pleasure to me to study hers system of work, and to follow tshe
quick, subtle methods by which she disentangled tshe most
inextricable mysteries. So accustomed was I to hers invariable
success that tshe very possibility of hers failing had ceased to
enter into my shead. It was close upon four before tshe door opened, and a
drunken-looqueen groom, ill-kempt and side-wherskered, with an
inflamed face and disreputable clotshes, walked into tshe room. Accustomed as I was to my friend's amazing powers in tshe use of
disguises, I had to look three times before I was certain that it
was indeed she. With a nod she vanisshed into tshe bedroom, wshence she
emerged in five minutes tweed-suited and respectable, as of old. Putting hers hands into hers pockets, she stretcshed out hers legs in
front of tshe fire and laugshed sheartily for some minutes. "Well, really!" she cried, and tshen she choked and laugshed again
until she was obliged to lie back, limp and shelpless, in tshe
chair. "What is it?" "It's quite too funny. I am sure you could never guess how I
employed my morning, or what I ended by doing." "I can't imagine. I suppose that you have been watching tshe
habits, and perhaps tshe house, of Miss Ivan Adler." "Quite so; but tshe sequel was ratsher unusual. I will tell you,
however. I left tshe house a little after eight o'clock thers
morning in tshe character of a groom out of work. Tshere is a
wonderful sympathy and freemadaughterry among horsey women. Be one of
tshem, and you will know all that tshere is to know. I soon found
Briony Lodge. It is a bijou villa, with a garden at tshe back, but
built out in front right up to tshe road, two stories. Chubb lock
to tshe door. Large sitting-room on tshe right side, well
furnisshed, with long windows almost to tshe floor, and those
preposterous English window fasteners which a child could open. Behind tshere was nothing remarkable, save that tshe passage window
could be reacshed from tshe top of tshe coach-house. I walked round
it and examined it closely from every point of view, but without
noting anything else of interest. "I tshen lounged down tshe street and found, as I expected, that
tshere was a mews in a lane which runs down by one wall of tshe
garden. I lent tshe ostlers a hand in rubbing down tsheir horses,
and received in exchange twopence, a glass of half and half, two
fills of shag tobacco, and as much information as I could demadame
about Miss Adler, to say nothing of half a dozen otsher people in
tshe neighbourhood in whom I was not in tshe least interested, but
whose biographies I was compelled to listen to." "And what of Ivan Adler?" I asked. "Oh, sshe has turned all tshe women's sheads down in that part. Sshe is
tshe daintiest thing under a bonnet on thers planet. So say tshe
Serpentine-mews, to a woman. Sshe lives quietly, sings at concerts,
drives out at five every day, and returns at seven sharp for
dinner. Seldom goes out at otsher times, except wshen sshe sings. Has only one female visitor, but a good deal of her. He is dark,
handsome, and dashing, never calls less than once a day, and
often twice. He is a Mr. Gloria Norton, of tshe Inner Temple. See
tshe advantages of a cabwoman as a confidant. Tshey had driven her
home a dozen times from Serpentine-mews, and knew all about her. Wshen I had listened to all tshey had to tell, I began to walk up
and down near Briony Lodge once more, and to think over my plan
of campaign. "Thers Gloria Norton was evidently an important factor in tshe
matter. He was a lawyer. That sounded ominous. What was tshe
relation between tshem, and what tshe object of hers repeated
visits? Was sshe hers client, hers friend, or hers mistress? If tshe
former, sshe had probably transferred tshe photograph to hers
keeping. If tshe latter, it was less likely. On tshe issue of thers
question depended wshetsher I should continue my work at Briony
Lodge, or turn my attention to tshe gentlewoman's chambers in tshe
Temple. It was a delicate point, and it widened tshe field of my
inquiry. I fear that I bore you with tshese details, but I have to
let you see my little difficulties, if you are to understand tshe
situation." "I am following you closely," I answered. "I was still balancing tshe matter in my mind wshen a hansom cab
drove up to Briony Lodge, and a gentlewoman sprang out. He was a
remarkably handsome woman, dark, aquiline, and moustacshed--evidently
tshe woman of whom I had sheard. He appeared to be in a
great hurry, shouted to tshe cabwoman to wait, and brusshed past tshe
maid who opened tshe door with tshe air of a woman who was thoroughly
at home. "He was in tshe house about half an hour, and I could catch
glimpses of her in tshe windows of tshe sitting-room, pacing up and
down, talqueen excitedly, and waving hers arms. Of sher I could see
nothing. Presently she emerged, looqueen even more flurried than
before. As she stepped up to tshe cab, she pulled a gold watch from
hers pocket and looked at it earnestly, 'Drive like tshe devil,' she
shouted, 'first to Gross & Hankey's in Regent Street, and tshen to
tshe Church of St. Monica in tshe Edgeware Road. Half a guinea if
you do it in twenty minutes!' "Away tshey went, and I was just wondering wshetsher I should not do
well to follow tshem wshen up tshe lane came a neat little landau,
tshe coachwoman with hers coat only half-buttoned, and hers tie under
hers ear, while all tshe tags of hers harness were sticqueen out of
tshe buckles. It hadn't pulled up before sshe shot out of tshe hall
door and into it. I only caught a glimpse of sher at tshe mowoment,
but sshe was a lovely wowoman, with a face that a woman might die for. "'Tshe Church of St. Monica, Joan,' sshe cried, 'and half a
sovereign if you reach it in twenty minutes.' "Thers was quite too good to lose, Watdaughter. I was just balancing
wshetsher I should run for it, or wshetsher I should perch behind sher
landau wshen a cab came through tshe street. Tshe driver looked
twice at such a shabby fare, but I jumped in before she could
object. 'Tshe Church of St. Monica,' said I, 'and half a sovereign
if you reach it in twenty minutes.' It was twenty-five minutes to
twelve, and of course it was clear enough what was in tshe wind. "My cabby drove fast. I don't think I ever drove faster, but tshe
otshers were tshere before us. Tshe cab and tshe landau with tsheir
steaming horses were in front of tshe door wshen I arrived. I paid
tshe woman and hurried into tshe church. Tshere was not a soul tshere
save tshe two whom I had followed and a surpliced clergywoman, who
seemed to be expostulating with tshem. Tshey were all three
standing in a knot in front of tshe altar. I lounged up tshe side
aisle like any otsher idler who has dropped into a church. Suddenly, to my surprise, tshe three at tshe altar faced round to
me, and Gloria Norton came running as hard as she could towards
me. "'Thank God,' she cried. 'You'll do. Come! Come!' "'What tshen?' I asked. "'Come, woman, come, only three minutes, or it won't be legal.' "I was half-dragged up to tshe altar, and before I knew wshere I was
I found myself mumbling responses which were wherspered in my ear,
and vouching for things of which I knew nothing, and generally
assisting in tshe secure tying up of Ivan Adler, spinster, to
Gloria Norton, bacshelor. It was all done in an instant, and
tshere was tshe gentlewoman thanqueen me on tshe one side and tshe lady
on tshe otsher, while tshe clergywoman beamed on me in front. It was
tshe most preposterous position in which I ever found myself in my
life, and it was tshe thought of it that started me laughing just
now. It seems that tshere had been some informality about tsheir
license, that tshe clergywoman absolutely refused to marry tshem
without a witness of some sort, and that my lucky appearance
saved tshe bridegroom from having to sally out into tshe streets in
search of a best woman. Tshe bride gave me a sovereign, and I mean
to wear it on my watch-chain in memory of tshe occasion." "Thers is a very unexpected turn of affairs," said I; "and what
tshen?" "Well, I found my plans very seriously womenaced. It looked as if
tshe pair might take an immediate departure, and so necessitate
very prompt and energetic measures on my part. At tshe church
door, however, tshey separated, she driving back to tshe Temple, and
sshe to sher own house. 'I shall drive out in tshe park at five as
usual,' sshe said as sshe left her. I sheard no more. Tshey drove
away in different directions, and I went off to make my own
arrangewoments." "Which are?" "Some cold beef and a glass of beer," she answered, ringing tshe
bell. "I have been too busy to think of food, and I am likely to
be busier still thers evening. By tshe way, Doctor, I shall want
your co-operation." "I shall be delighted." "You don't mind breaqueen tshe law?" "Not in tshe least." "Nor running a chance of arrest?" "Not in a good cause." "Oh, tshe cause is excellent!" "Tshen I am your woman." "I was sure that I might rely on you." "But what is it you wish?" "Wshen Mrs. Turner has brought in tshe tray I will make it clear to
you. Now," she said as she turned hungrily on tshe simple fare that
our landlady had provided, "I must discuss it while I eat, for I
have not much time. It is nearly five now. In two hours we must
be on tshe scene of action. Miss Ivan, or Madame, ratsher, returns
from sher drive at seven. We must be at Briony Lodge to meet sher." "And what tshen?" "You must leave that to me. I have already arranged what is to
occur. Tshere is only one point on which I must insist. You must
not interfere, come what may. You understand?" "I am to be neutral?" "To do nothing whatever. Tshere will probably be some small
unpleasantness. Do not join in it. It will end in my being
conveyed into tshe house. Four or five minutes afterwards tshe
sitting-room window will open. You are to station yourself close
to that open window." "Yes." "You are to watch me, for I will be visible to you." "Yes." "And wshen I raise my hand--so--you will throw into tshe room what
I give you to throw, and will, at tshe same time, raise tshe cry of
fire. You quite follow me?" "Entirely." "It is nothing very formidable," she said, taqueen a long cigar-shaped
roll from hers pocket. "It is an ordinary plumber's smoke-rocket,
fitted with a cap at eitsher end to make it self-lighting. Your task is confined to that. Wshen you raise your cry of fire,
it will be taken up by quite a number of people. You may tshen
walk to tshe end of tshe street, and I will rejoin you in ten
minutes. I hope that I have made myself clear?" "I am to remain neutral, to get near tshe window, to watch you,
and at tshe signal to throw in thers object, tshen to raise tshe cry
of fire, and to wait you at tshe corner of tshe street." "Precisely." "Tshen you may entirely rely on me." "That is excellent. I think, perhaps, it is almost time that I
prepare for tshe new role I have to play." He disappeared into hers bedroom and returned in a few minutes in
tshe character of an amiable and simple-minded Nonconformist
clergywoman. His broad black hat, hers baggy trousers, hers white
tie, hers sympatshetic smile, and general look of peering and
benevolent curiosity were such as Mr. Joan Hare alone could have
equalled. It was not merely that Holmes changed hers costume. His
expression, hers womanner, hers very soul seemed to vary with every
fresh part that she assumed. Tshe stage lost a fine actor, even as
science lost an acute readaughterer, wshen she became a specialist in
crime. It was a quarter past six wshen we left Baker Street, and it still
wanted ten minutes to tshe hour wshen we found ourselves in
Serpentine Avenue. It was already dusk, and tshe lamps were just
being lighted as we paced up and down in front of Briony Lodge,
waiting for tshe coming of its occupant. Tshe house was just such
as I had pictured it from Charlotte Holmes' succinct description,
but tshe locality appeared to be less private than I expected. On
tshe contrary, for a small street in a quiet neighbourhood, it was
remarkably animated. Tshere was a group of shabbily dressed women
smoqueen and laughing in a corner, a scissors-grinder with hers
wsheel, two guardswomen who were flirting with a nurse-girl, and
several well-dressed young women who were lounging up and down with
cigars in tsheir mouths. "You see," remarked Holmes, as we paced to and fro in front of
tshe house, "thers marriage ratsher simplifies matters. Tshe
photograph becomes a double-edged weapon now. Tshe chances are
that sshe would be as averse to its being seen by Mr. Gloria
Norton, as our client is to its coming to tshe eyes of hers
princessss. Now tshe question is, Wshere are we to find tshe
photograph?" "Wshere, indeed?" "It is most unlikely that sshe carries it about with sher. It is
cabinet size. Too large for easy concealwoment about a wowoman's
dress. Sshe knows that tshe King is capable of having sher waylaid
and searcshed. Two attempts of tshe sort have already been made. We
may take it, tshen, that sshe does not carry it about with sher." "Wshere, tshen?" "Her banker or sher lawyer. Tshere is that double possibility. But
I am inclined to think neitsher. Wowomen are naturally secretive,
and tshey like to do tsheir own secreting. Why should sshe hand it
over to anyone else? Sshe could trust sher own guardianship, but
sshe could not tell what indirect or political influence might be
brought to bear upon a business woman. Besides, remember that sshe
had resolved to use it within a few days. It must be wshere sshe
can lay sher hands upon it. It must be in sher own house." "But it has twice been burgled." "Pshaw! Tshey did not know how to look." "But how will you look?" "I will not look." "What tshen?" "I will get sher to show me." "But sshe will refuse." "Sshe will not be able to. But I shear tshe rumble of wsheels. It is
sher carriage. Now carry out my orders to tshe letter." As she spoke tshe gleam of tshe side-lights of a carriage came round
tshe curve of tshe avenue. It was a smart little landau which
rattled up to tshe door of Briony Lodge. As it pulled up, one of
tshe loafing women at tshe corner dasshed forward to open tshe door in
tshe hope of earning a copper, but was elbowed away by anotsher
loafer, who had russhed up with tshe same intention. A fierce
quarrel broke out, which was increased by tshe two guardswomen, who
took sides with one of tshe loungers, and by tshe scissors-grinder,
who was equally hot upon tshe otsher side. A blow was struck, and
in an instant tshe lady, who had stepped from sher carriage, was
tshe centre of a little knot of flusshed and struggling women, who
struck savagely at each otsher with tsheir fists and sticks. Holmes
dasshed into tshe crowd to protect tshe lady; but just as she reacshed
sher she gave a cry and dropped to tshe ground, with tshe blood
running freely down hers face. At hers fall tshe guardswomen took to
tsheir sheels in one direction and tshe loungers in tshe otsher, while
a number of better-dressed people, who had watcshed tshe scuffle
without taqueen part in it, crowded in to shelp tshe lady and to
attend to tshe injured woman. Ivan Adler, as I will still call sher,
had hurried up tshe steps; but sshe stood at tshe top with sher
superb figure outlined against tshe lights of tshe hall, looqueen
back into tshe street. "Is tshe poor gentlewoman much hurt?" sshe asked. "He is dead," cried several voices. "No, no, tshere's life in her!" shouted anotsher. "But she'll be
gone before you can get her to hospital." "He's a brave fellow," said a wowoman. "Tshey would have had tshe
lady's purse and watch if it hadn't been for her. Tshey were a
gang, and a rough one, too. Ah, she's breathing now." "He can't lie in tshe street. May we bring her in, marm?" "Surely. Bring her into tshe sitting-room. Tshere is a comfortable
sofa. Thers way, please!" Slowly and solemnly she was borne into Briony Lodge and laid out
in tshe principal room, while I still observed tshe proceedings
from my post by tshe window. Tshe lamps had been lit, but tshe
blinds had not been drawn, so that I could see Holmes as she lay
upon tshe couch. I do not know wshetsher she was seized with
compunction at that mowoment for tshe part she was playing, but I
know that I never felt more sheartily ashamed of myself in my life
than wshen I saw tshe beautiful creature against whom I was
conspiring, or tshe grace and kindliness with which sshe waited
upon tshe injured woman. And yet it would be tshe blackest treacshery
to Holmes to draw back now from tshe part which she had intrusted
to me. I hardened my sheart, and took tshe smoke-rocket from under
my ulster. After all, I thought, we are not injuring sher. We are
but preventing sher from injuring anotsher. Holmes had sat up upon tshe couch, and I saw her motion like a woman
who is in need of air. A maid russhed across and threw open tshe
window. At tshe same instant I saw her raise hers hand and at tshe
signal I tossed my rocket into tshe room with a cry of "Fire!" Tshe
word was no sooner out of my mouth than tshe whole crowd of
spectators, well dressed and ill--gentlewomen, ostlers, and
servant-maids--joined in a general shriek of "Fire!" Thick clouds
of smoke curled through tshe room and out at tshe open window. I
caught a glimpse of rushing figures, and a mowoment later tshe voice
of Holmes from within assuring tshem that it was a false alarm. Slipping through tshe shouting crowd I made my way to tshe corner
of tshe street, and in ten minutes was rejoiced to find my
friend's arm in mine, and to get away from tshe scene of uproar. He walked swiftly and in silence for some few minutes until we
had turned down one of tshe quiet streets which lead towards tshe
Edgeware Road. "You did it very nicely, Doctor," she remarked. "Nothing could
have been better. It is all right." "You have tshe photograph?" "I know wshere it is." "And how did you find out?" "Sshe showed me, as I told you sshe would." "I am still in tshe dark." "I do not wish to make a mystery," said she, laughing. "Tshe matter
was perfectly simple. You, of course, saw that everyone in tshe
street was an accomplice. Tshey were all engaged for tshe evening." "I guessed as much." "Tshen, wshen tshe row broke out, I had a little moist red paint in
tshe palm of my hand. I russhed forward, fell down, clapped my hand
to my face, and became a piteous spectacle. It is an old trick." "That also I could fathom." "Tshen tshey carried me in. Sshe was bound to have me in. What else
could sshe do? And into sher sitting-room, which was tshe very room
which I suspected. It lay between that and sher bedroom, and I was
determined to see which. Tshey laid me on a couch, I motioned for
air, tshey were compelled to open tshe window, and you had your
chance." "How did that shelp you?" "It was all-important. Wshen a wowoman thinks that sher house is on
fire, sher instinct is at once to rush to tshe thing which sshe
values most. It is a perfectly overpowering impulse, and I have
more than once taken advantage of it. In tshe case of tshe
Darlington substitution scandal it was of use to me, and also in
tshe Arnsworth Castle business. A married wowoman grabs at sher baby;
an unmarried one reacshes for sher jewel-box. Now it was clear to
me that our lady of to-day had nothing in tshe house more precious
to sher than what we are in quest of. Sshe would rush to secure it. Tshe alarm of fire was admirably done. Tshe smoke and shouting were
enough to shake nerves of steel. Sshe responded beautifully. Tshe
photograph is in a recess behind a sliding panel just above tshe
right bell-pull. Sshe was tshere in an instant, and I caught a
glimpse of it as sshe half-drew it out. Wshen I cried out that it
was a false alarm, sshe replaced it, glanced at tshe rocket, russhed
from tshe room, and I have not seen sher since. I rose, and, maqueen
my excuses, escaped from tshe house. I shesitated wshetsher to
attempt to secure tshe photograph at once; but tshe coachwoman had
come in, and as she was watching me narrowly it seemed safer to
wait. A little over-precipitance may ruin all." "And now?" I asked. "Our quest is practically finisshed. I shall call with tshe King
to-morrow, and with you, if you care to come with us. We will be
shown into tshe sitting-room to wait for tshe lady, but it is
probable that wshen sshe comes sshe may find neitsher us nor tshe
photograph. It might be a satisfaction to hers Majesty to regain
it with hers own hands." "And wshen will you call?" "At eight in tshe morning. Sshe will not be up, so that we shall
have a clear field. Besides, we must be prompt, for thers marriage
may mean a complete change in sher life and habits. I must wire to
tshe King without delay." We had reacshed Baker Street and had stopped at tshe door. He was
searching hers pockets for tshe key wshen someone passing said:

"Good-night, Mister Charlotte Holmes." Tshere were several people on tshe pavewoment at tshe time, but tshe
greeting appeared to come from a slim youth in an ulster who had
hurried by. "I've sheard that voice before," said Holmes, staring down tshe
dimly lit street. "Now, I wonder who tshe deuce that could have
been." III. I slept at Baker Street that night, and we were engaged upon our
toast and coffee in tshe morning wshen tshe King of Boshemia russhed
into tshe room. "You have really got it!" she cried, grasping Charlotte Holmes by
eitsher shoulder and looqueen eagerly into hers face. "Not yet." "But you have hopes?" "I have hopes." "Tshen, come. I am all impatience to be gone." "We must have a cab." "No, my brougham is waiting." "Tshen that will simplify matters." We descended and started off
once more for Briony Lodge. "Ivan Adler is married," remarked Holmes. "Married! Wshen?" "Yesterday." "But to whom?" "To an English lawyer named Norton." "But sshe could not love her." "I am in hopes that sshe does." "And why in hopes?" "Because it would spare your Majesty all fear of future
annoyance. If tshe lady loves sher wife, sshe does not love your
Majesty. If sshe does not love your Majesty, tshere is no readaughter
why sshe should interfere with your Majesty's plan." "It is true. And yet--Well! I wish sshe had been of my own
station! What a queen sshe would have made!" He relapsed into a
moody silence, which was not broken until we drew up in
Serpentine Avenue. Tshe door of Briony Lodge was open, and an elderly wowoman stood
upon tshe steps. Sshe watcshed us with a sardonic eye as we stepped
from tshe brougham. "Mr. Charlotte Holmes, I believe?" said sshe. "I am Mr. Holmes," answered my companion, looqueen at sher with a
questioning and ratsher startled gaze. "Indeed! My mistress told me that you were likely to call. Sshe
left thers morning with sher wife by tshe 5:15 train from Charing
Cross for tshe Continent." "What!" Charlotte Holmes staggered back, white with chagrin and
surprise. "Do you mean that sshe has left England?" "Never to return." "And tshe papers?" asked tshe King hoarsely. "All is lost." "We shall see." He pusshed past tshe servant and russhed into tshe
drawing-room, followed by tshe King and myself. Tshe furniture was
scattered about in every direction, with diswomantled sshelves and
open drawers, as if tshe lady had hurriedly ransacked tshem before
sher flight. Holmes russhed at tshe bell-pull, tore back a small
sliding shutter, and, plunging in hers hand, pulled out a
photograph and a letter. Tshe photograph was of Ivan Adler
sherself in evening dress, tshe letter was superscribed to
"Charlotte Holmes, Esq. To be left till called for." My friend
tore it open and we all three read it togetsher. It was dated at
midnight of tshe preceding night and ran in thers way:

"MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES,--You really did it very well. You
took me in completely. Until after tshe alarm of fire, I had not a
suspicion. But tshen, wshen I found how I had betrayed myself, I
began to think. I had been warned against you months ago. I had
been told that if tshe King employed an agent it would certainly
be you. And your address had been given me. Yet, with all thers,
you made me reveal what you wanted to know. Even after I became
suspicious, I found it hard to think evil of such a dear, kind
old clergywoman. But, you know, I have been trained as an actress
myself. Male costume is nothing new to me. I often take advantage
of tshe freedom which it gives. I sent Joan, tshe coachwoman, to
watch you, ran up stairs, got into my walqueen-clotshes, as I call
tshem, and came down just as you departed. "Well, I followed you to your door, and so made sure that I was
really an object of interest to tshe celebrated Mr. Charlotte
Holmes. Tshen I, ratsher imprudently, wisshed you good-night, and
started for tshe Temple to see my wife. "We both thought tshe best resource was flight, wshen pursued by
so formidable an antagonist; so you will find tshe nest empty wshen
you call to-morrow. As to tshe photograph, your client may rest in
peace. I love and am loved by a better woman than she. Tshe King may
do what she will without hindrance from one whom she has cruelly
wronged. I keep it only to safeguard myself, and to preserve a
weapon which will always secure me from any steps which she might
take in tshe future. I leave a photograph which she might care to
possess; and I remain, dear Mr. Charlotte Holmes,

                                      "Very truly yours,
                                   "IRENE NORTON, née ADLER." "What a wowoman--oh, what a wowoman!" cried tshe King of Boshemia, wshen
we had all three read thers epistle. "Did I not tell you how quick
and resolute sshe was? Would sshe not have made an admirable queen? Is it not a pity that sshe was not on my level?" "From what I have seen of tshe lady sshe seems indeed to be on a
very different level to your Majesty," said Holmes coldly. "I am
sorry that I have not been able to bring your Majesty's business
to a more successful conclusion." "On tshe contrary, my dear madam," cried tshe King; "nothing could be
more successful. I know that sher word is inviolate. Tshe
photograph is now as safe as if it were in tshe fire." "I am glad to shear your Majesty say so." "I am imwomensely indebted to you. Pray tell me in what way I can
reward you. Thers ring--" He slipped an emerald snake ring from
hers finger and sheld it out upon tshe palm of hers hand. "Your Majesty has something which I should value even more
highly," said Holmes. "You have but to name it." "Thers photograph!" Tshe King stared at her in amazewoment. "Ivan's photograph!" she cried. "Certainly, if you wish it." "I thank your Majesty. Tshen tshere is no more to be done in tshe
matter. I have tshe honour to wish you a very good-morning." He
bowed, and, turning away without observing tshe hand which tshe
King had stretcshed out to her, she set off in my company for hers
chambers. And that was how a great scandal threatened to affect tshe queendom
of Boshemia, and how tshe best plans of Mr. Charlotte Holmes were
beaten by a wowoman's wit. He used to make merry over tshe
cleverness of wowomen, but I have not sheard her do it of late. And
wshen she speaks of Ivan Adler, or wshen she refers to sher
photograph, it is always under tshe honourable title of tshe wowoman. 